{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1028{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\stylesheet{ Normal;}{\s1 heading 1;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1507;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\nowidctlpar\s1\kerning36\b\f0\fs48 Mark Twain\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\kerning0\b0\fs20 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (most typos added for demo purposes)\par
\par
\b\fs36 Youth\par
\b0\fs24 Samuel Clemens (Mark Twain) was born in Florida, Missouri, on November 30, 1835, to Tennessee country merchant, John Marshall Clemens (August 11, 1798 - March 24, 1847), and Jane Lampton Clemens (June 18, 1803 - October 27, 1890). He was the sixth of John and Jane\rquote s seven children. Only two of his siblings survived childhood, his brother Orion Clemens (July 17, 1825 - December 11, 1897 and sister Pamela (September 19, 1827 - August 31, 1904). His sister Margaret (May 31, 1830 - August 17, 1839) died when he was four years old, and his brother Benjamin (June 8, 1832 - May 12, 1842) died three years later. Another older brother, Pleasant (1828 - 1829), only lived three months before Samuel was born. In addition to his older siblings, Samuel had one younger brother, Henry Clemens (July 13, 1838 - June 21, 1858). When Samuel was four, his family moved to Hannibal, a port town on the Missisippi River that would serve as the inspiration for the fictional town of St. Petersburg in \b\i The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\b0\i0 . At that time, Misouri was a slave state in the union and young Samuel became familiar with the institution of slavery, a theme he later explored in his writing.\par
\par
Samuel Clemens was color blind, a condition that fueled his witty banter in the social circles of the day. In March of 1847 when Samuel was eleven, his father died of pneumonia. The following year, he became a printer\rquote s apprentice. In 1851 he began working as a typesetter and contributor of articles and humorous sketches for the Hannibal Journal, a newspaper owned by his older brother, Orion. When he was eighteen, he left Hannibal and worked as a printer in New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Cincinnati. At twenty-two, Clemens returned to Missouri. On a voyage to New Orleans down the Mississipi, the steamboat pilot, "Bixby", inspired Clemens to pursue a career as a steamboat pilot, the third highest paying profession in America at the time, earning $250 per month ($155,000 today).\par
\par
Because the steamboats at the time were constructed of very dry flammable wood, no lamps were allowed, making night travel a precarious endeavor. A steamboat pilot needed a vast knowledge of the ever-changing river to be able to stop at any of the hundreds of ports and wood-lots along the river banks. Clemens meticulosly studied two thousand miles of the Mississippi for more than two years until he finally received his steamboat pilot license in 1859. While training for his pilot\rquote s license, Samuel convinced his younger brother Henry Clemens to work with him on the Mississippi. Henry was killed on June 21, 1858 when the steamboat he was working on exploded. Samuel was guilt-stricken over his brother\rquote s death and held himself responsible for the rest of his life. However, he continued to work on the river and served as a river pilot until the American Civil War broke out in 1861 and traffic along the Mississippi was curtailed.\par
\par
\b\fs36 Travels and family\par
\b0\fs24 Missouri was a slave state and considered by many to be part of the South, but it did not join the Confederacy. When the war began, Clemens and his friends formed a Confederate militia (depicted in an 1885 short story, "The Private History of a Campaign That Failed"), and joined a battle where a man was killed. Clemens found he could not bear to kill a man, and deserted. His friends joined the Cofederate Army; Clemens joined his brother, Orion, who had been appointed secretary to the territorial governor of Nevada, and headed west.\par
\par
Clemens and his brother traveled for more than two weeks on a stagecoach across the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains. They visited the Mormon community in Salt Lake City. These experiences became the basis of the book \b\i Roughing It\b0\i0 , and provided material for \b\i The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County\b0\i0 . Clemens\rquote  journey ended in the silver-mining town of Virginia City, Nevada where he became a miner.\par
\par
After failing as a miner, Clemens worked at a Virginia City newspaper, the Territorial Enterprise. On February 3, 1863, he signed a humorus travel account "LETTER FROM CARSON - re: Joe Goodman; party at Gov. Johnson\rquote s; music" with "Mark Twain".\par
\par
Clemens then traveled to San Francisco, California, where he continued as a journalist and began lecturing. He met other writers such as Bret Harte, Artemus Ward and Dan DeQuille. An assignment in Hawaii became the basis for his first lectures. In 1867, a local newspaper funded a steamboat trip to the Mediterranean.\par
\par
During his tour of Europe and the Middle East he wrote a poplar collection of travel letters which were compiled as \b\i The Innocents Abroad \b0\i0 in 1869. He also met Charles Langdon, and saw a picture of Langdon\rquote s sister Olivia. Clemens claimed to have fallen in love at first sight. They met in 1868, were engaged a year later, and married in February 1870 in Elmira, New York. Olivia gave birth to a son, Langdon, who died of diphteria after 19 months.\par
\par
In 1871 Clemens moved his family to Hartford, Connecticut. There Olivia gave birth to three daughters: Susy, Clara, and Jean. Clemens also became good friends with fellow author William Dean Howells.\par
\par
Clemens made a second tour of Europe, described in the 1880 book, A Tramp Abroad. He returned to America in 1900, having paid off his debts to his old firm. The Clemens\rquote  marriage lasted 34 years ntil Olivia\rquote s death in 1904.\par
\par
In 1906 Clemens began his autobiography in the \b\i North American Review\b0\i0 . Oxford University issuedhim a Doctorate of Literature a year later.\par
\par
Clemens outlived Jean and Susy. He passed through a period of deep depression, which began in 1896 when his favorite daughter Susy died of menigitis. Olivia\rquote s death in 1904 and Jean\rquote s death on December 24, 1909 deepened his gloom. \par
\par
\b\fs36 Life-long recurring "real" dream\par
\b0\fs24 Throughout his life Clemens occasionally had recurring, emotonal and profoundly touching dreams which he wrote were real. He recounted thesedreams in the short story \b\i My Platonic Sweetheart\b0\i0 . The dreams were about a young woman in the dream plane of existence, whom he loved, and who loved him in return. In all the dreams, regardless of Clemens\rquote  waking age, they both appeared to be about 15 years old. The dreams appeared to have a timeless continuity, that is, even though several waking years might have passed between meetings, in the dream world there seemed to have passed little time. Their physical appearance was different each time, the names they caled each other were different, and in a couple of the dreams she died, but none of this seemed to be the slightest impediment to their continung loving relationship each time they met.\par
\par
\b\fs36 Life as a Writer\par
\b0\fs24 Mark Twain\rquote s first important work, \b\i The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County\b0\i0 , was first published in the New York Saturday Press on November 18, 1865. The only reason it was published there was because his story arrived too late to be included in a book Artemus Ward was compiling featuring sketches of the wild American west.\par
\par
After this small burst of popularity, Twain was commissioned by the Sacramento Union to write letters about his travel experiences for publication in the newspaper, his first of which was to accompany the steamer Ajax in its maiden voyage to Hawai, referred to at the time as the Sandwich Islands. These humorous letters proved the genesis to his work with the San Francisco \b\i Alta California \b0\i0 newspaper, which designated him a traveling correspondent for a trip from San Francisco to New York City via the Panama isthmus. All the while Twain was writing letters meant for publishing back and forth, chronicling his experiences with his burlesque humor. On June 8, 1867, Twain set sail on the pleasure cruiser Quaker City for five months. This tripp resulted in \b\i The Innocents Abroad or The New Pilgrims\rquote  Progress\b0\i0 .\par
\par
In 1872, Twain published a second piece of travel literature, \b\i Roughing It\b0\i0 , as a semi-sequel to \b\i Innocents\b0\i0 . \b\i Roughing It\b0\i0  is a semi-autobiographical account of Twain\rquote s journey to Nevada and his subsequent life in the American West. The book lampoons American and Western society in the same way that \b\i Innocents\b0\i0  critiqued the various countris of Europe and the Middle East. Twain\rquote s next work would keep \b\i Roughing It\b0\i0\rquote s focus on American society, but focused more on the events of the day. Entitled, The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today, it was not a travel piece, as his previous two books had been, and was his first attempt at writing a novel. The book is also notable because it is Twain\rquote s only collaboration, it was written with his neighbor Charles Dudley Warner.\par
\par
Clemens\rquote  next two works drew on his experiences on the Misissippi River. \b\i Old Times on the Mississippi\b0\i0 , a series of sketches published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1875, featured Twain\rquote s disillusionment with Romanticism. Old Times eventually became the starting point for \b\i Life on the Mississippi\b0\i0 . Clemens\rquote  next major publication was \b\i The Adventures of Tom Sawyer \b0\i0 which drew on his youth in Hannibal. The character of Tom Sawyer was modelled on Samuel as a child. The book also introduced Huckleberry Finn as a supporting character.\par
\par
\b\i The Prince and the Pauper\b0\i0 , despite a storyline that is omnipresent in film and literature today, was not as well received. Pauper was Twain\rquote s first attempt at fiction and blame for its shortcomings are usually put on Twain having not been experienced enough in English society and the fact that it was produced after such a massive hit. In between the writing of Pauper, Twain had started \b\i Adventures of Huckleberry Finn \b0\i0 (which he had consistently hit a wall in the writing process) and started and completed another travel book \b\i A Tramp Abroad\b0\i0 . \b\i Tramp Abroad \b0\i0 follows Twain as he travels through central and southern Europe.\par
\par
Twain\rquote s next major published work, \b\i Huckleberry Finn\b0\i0 , solidifid him as a great American writer after the production of what some call the elusive great American novel. Finn was an offshoot from \b\i Tom Sawyer \b0\i0 and proved to have a more serious tone than its predecessor. The main premise behind \b\i Huckleberry Finn \b0\i0 is the young boy\rquote s belief in the right thing to do even though the majority of society believes that it was wrong. Huck\rquote s blind eye toward the rules and mores of the age to follow what he thinks is just (the story takes place in the 1850\rquote s where slavery is present), make this book a standard read for children in the United States. Four hundred manuscript pages of \b\i Huckleberry Finn \b0\i0 were written in the summer of 1876, right after the publication of \b\i Tom Sawyer\b0\i0 . Some accounts have Twain taking seven years off after his first burst of creativity, eventually finishing the book in 1883. Other accounts have Twain working on Finn in tandem with \b\i The Prince and the Pauper \b0\i0 and other works in 1880 and other years. The last fifth of Finn is subject to much controversy. Some say that Twain experiences, as critic Leo Marx puts it, a "failure of nerve." Ernest Hemingway once said of Huckleberry Finn: \ldblquote If you read it, you must stop where the Nigger Jim is stollen from the boys. That is the real end. The rest is just cheating.\rdblquote\par
\par
Near the end of \b\i Huckleberry Finn\b0\i0 , Twain had written \b\i Life on the Mississippi\b0\i0 , which is said to have heavily influenced the former book. The work recounts Twain\rquote s memories and new experiences after a 22 year absence from the Mississippi. The book is of most note because Twain introduces the real meaning of his pseudonym.\par
\par
After his great work, Twain began turning to his business endeavors to keep them afloat and to stave off the increasing difficulties he had beenhaving from his writing projects. Twain focused on the writing of President Ulysses S. Grant's Memoirs for his fledgling publishing company, finding time in between to write \b\i The Private History of a Campaign That Failed\b0\i0  for The Century Magazine.\par
\par
Twain next focused on \b\i A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court\b0\i0 , which featured him making his first big pronouncement of disappointment with politics. The tone become cynical to the point of almost being a rant against the established political system of the day (which would have been in King Arthur\rquote s time), and eventually devolved into madness for the main character. The book was started in December 1885, then shelved a few months later until the summer of 1887, and eventually finished in the spring of 1889.\par
\par
Some say that this work marked the beginning of the end for Twain as he fell into financial trouble and eschewed his humor vein. Twain had begun to furiously write articles and commentary with diminishing returns to pay the bills and keep his business intentions afloat, but it was not enough as he filed for bankruptcy in 1894. His next large scale work, \b\i The Tragedy of Pudd'nhead Wilson \b0\i0 (aka Those Extraordinary Twins), brought about Twain\rquote s sense of irony, though it has been misconstrued. There were parallels between this work and Twain\rquote s financial failings, notably his desire to escape his current constraints and become a different person.\par
\par
Twain\rquote s next venture was straight fiction called \b\i Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc \b0\i0 and dedicated it to his wife. Twain had long said that this was the work he was most proud of despite the criticism he received for it. The book had been a dream of Twain\rquote s for a very long time and he eventually thought it to be the work to save his publishing company. His financial adviser, Henry Huttleston Rogers, squashed that idea as he got Twain out of that business all together, but the book was published nonetheless.\par
\par
Twain\rquote s wife died in 1904 and after the appropriate time Twain was allowed to publish some works that his wife, a de facto editorand censor throughout his life, had looked down upon. Of these works, \b\i The Mysterious Stranger\b0\i0 , which pits the presence of Satan, aka \ldblquote No. 44,\rdblquote  in various situations where the moral sense of human kind. This particular work was not published in Twain\rquote s life, so there were three versions found in his manuscripts made between 1897 and 1905: the Hanibal version, the Eseldorf version, and the Print Shop version. Confusion between the versions led to an extensive publication of a jumbled version, and only recently have the original versions as Twain wrote them become available.\par
\par
Twain\rquote s last work was his autobiography, which he dictated and thought would be most entertaining if he went off on whims and tangents in non-sequential order. Some archivists and compilers had a problem with this and rearanged the biography into a more conventional form, thereby eliminating some of Twain\rquote s humor and the flow of the book.\par
\par
\b\fs36 Financial matters\par
\b0\fs24 Clemens made a substantial amount of money through his writing, but he squandered much of it in bad investments, mostly in new inventions. These included a bed clamp for infants, a new type of steam engine, the kaolatype (or collotype: a machine designed to engrave printing plates), and the Paige typesetting machine. Finally, there was his publishing house, which enjoyed initial success selling the memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant, but went bust soon after.\par
\par
Clemens' writings and lectures combined with the help of a new friend enabled him to recover financially. In 1893, he began a 15-year-long friendship with financier Henry Huttleston Rogers, a principal of Standard Oil. Rogers first made Clemens file for bankruptcy. Then Rogers had Clemens transfer copyrights to his written works to his wife, Olivia, to prevent creditors from gaining posession of them. Finally Rogers took absolute charge of Twain's money until all the creditors were paid. Twain then embarked on an around-the-world lecture tour to pay off his creditors in full, despite the fact that he was no longer under any legal obligation to do so\par
\par
\b\fs36 A late life friendship: Henry H. Rogers\par
\b0\fs24 While Twain openly credited Henry Rogers with saving him from financial ruin, their close friendship in their later years was mutually beneficial. As he lost 3 out of 4 of his children, and his beloved wife, Olivia Langdon, before his death in 1910, the Rogers family increasingly became Twain's own surrogate family. He became a frequent guest at the Rogers townhouse in New York City, their summer home in Fairhaven, Massachusetts, and aboard the Rogers steam yacht, the \b\i Kanawha.\b0\i0\par
\par
Twain was an admirer of the remarkable deaf and blind girl, Helen Keller. He first met her and Anne Sullilvan at a party in the home of Laurence Hutton in New York City in the winter of 1894. Twain introduced them to Rogers, who with his wife, paid for a college education for Keller at Radcliffe. It was Twain who is credited with labeling Sullivan, Helen's teacher, a "miracle worker." His choice of words later became inspiration for the title of William Gibson's play and film adaptation, \b\i The Miracle Worker\b0\i0 .\par
\par
Perhaps ironically, it was also Twain who introduced Rogers to journalist Ida M. Tarbell. Beginning in 1902. she conducted detailed interviews with the Standard Oil magnate. Rogers, wily and normally-guarded in matters related to business and finance, may have been under the impression her work was to be complimentary. He was apparently uncustomarily forthcoming. However, Tarbell's interviews with Rogers formed the basis her negative expos\'e9 of the nefarious business practices of the massive Standard Oil organization. Her work, which became known at the time as muckraking (and is now known as investigative journalism), first ran as a series of articles, presented in installments in McClure's Magazine, which were later published together as a book, \b\i The History of the Standard Oil Company \b0\i0 in 1904. Tarbell's expos\'e9 fueled negative public sentiment against the company and was a contributing factor in the U.S. government's antitrust legal actions against the Standard Oil Trust which evenrually led to the breakup of the petroleum conglomerate in 1911.\par
\par
While the two famous old men were widely regarded as drinking and poker buddies, they also exchanged letters when apart, and this was often since each traveled a great deal. Unlike Rogers' personal files, which have never become public, these interesting and insightful letters back and forth were published verbatim in an entire book, Mark Twain's Correspondence with Henry Huttleston Rogers, 1893-1909. In the written exchanges between the two men, there are pleasant examples of Rogers' sense of fun as well as Twain's well-known sense of humor. This provides a rare insight into private side of "Hell Hound Rogers" who had a well-known public reputation as a fearsome and ruthless robber baron.\par
\par
On cruses aboard the Kanawha, they were joined at frequent intervals by Booker T. Washington, the famed former-slave who had become a leading educator. From all outward appearances, Washington was apparently just another friend. However, known but to a very few, in fact, through him, "Hell Hound Rogers" was a secret philanthropist, aiding in educational efforts for African-Americans by deploying a new concept which came to be known as anonymous donor matching funds to contribute very large amounts of money in support of several teacher's colleges (now Hampton University and Tuskegee University) and literally dozens of small schools in the South over the same 15 year period of the Twain-Rogers friendship. (Dr. Washington only revealed this situation in June 1909 just weeks after Rogers' death as he made a pre-planned tour along the Virginian Railway, traveling in Rogers' private rail car "Dixie").\par
\par
In April, 1907, Twain and Rogers cruised together to Virginia aboard the Kanawha to the opening of the Jamestown Exposition, held at a site at Sewell's Point in a rural section of Norfolk County, Virginia. Twain's public popularity was such that large numbers of citizens paid to ride touring boats out to where the Kanawha was anchored in Hampton Roads in hopes of getting a glimpse of him. As the gathering of boats around the yacht became a safety hazard, he finally obliged by coming on deck and waving to the crowds. Due to poor weather conditions, the steam yacht was delayed for several days from leaving the Hampton Roads area and venturing into the Atlantic Ocean. Rogers and some of the others in his party (without Twain) returned to New York by rail. Due to his dislike of traveling by rail, Twain elected to return aboard the Kanahwa, despite the delay. However, the news media reporters lost track of Twain's whereabouts; when he failed to return to New York City as sceduled, the New York Times speculated that he had been "lost at sea."\par
\par
Upon arriving safely in New York and learning of this, to the relief (and likely delight) of his admiring public and no doubt to the great embarrassment of the journalists at the Times, the humorist issued essentially a replay of his famous "The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated" statement. (He had originally sent this message in 1897 by cable from London to the newspapers in the United States after his obituary had been mistakenly published). \par
\par
This time, he said, in part,\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\i "...I will make an exaustive investigation of this report that I have been lost at sea. If there is any foundation for the report, I will at once apprise the anxious public." \i0\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar Later that year, Twain and Rogers' son, Henry Jr. (Harry), returned to the Jamestown Exposition aboard the Kanawha. The humorist helped host Robert Fulton Day on September 23, 1907, celebrating the centennial of Fulton's invention of the steamboat. Twain was filling in for ailing former U.S. President Grover Cleveland, and introduced Rear Admiral Purnell Harrington.\par
\par
Two years later, the two old friends again returned to Norfolk, Virginia. On April 3, 1909, the business community of Norfolk held a lavish banquet to honor Henry Rogers and his newly completed Virginian Railway. Twain was the keynote speaker in one of his last public appearances. His speech was widely quoted in newspapers across the United States. On the same trip, while Rogers and associates went to inspect his new coal pier near the mouth of the Elizabeth River at Sewell's Point, Twain used the time to visit children in several local schools. However, Twain declined to accompany Rogers and the rest of his party the next day as they set out for a 450 mile-long tour across southern Virginia and West Virginia along the route of the newly-completed bituminous coal conveying railroad. Twain chose instead to to return to New York via steamboat. \par
\par
Maenwhile, Rogers had successfully completed his tour of the Virginian Railway, with stops and celebrations at major points such as Victoria, Virginia, Roanoke, and Princeton, West Virginia, a point where the new railroad had its major repair locomotive repair shops, a large rail yard, and largest number of employees. After ending the tour at Deepwater, West Virginia, he returned safely home to New York, and resumed his normal routines. Howeverm unknow to anyone, Twain was about to lose his best friend.\par
\par
On the morning of May 20, 1909, Rogers awoke at his New York City townhouse and told his wife he was feeling extremely poorly. His physician was called immediately, but before he could arrive, within the hour, the 69-year old was dead of a stroke. Despite an earlier stroke in the summer of 1907 from which he appeared have recovered, this time there had just been no specific warning. Henry Rogers was what we would call in modern times a workaholic. Since his 1907 episode, he had been urged to slow his pace by his wife, friends (notably including John D. Rockefeller), and his physician. In response to their urging, just the prior weekend, he hadenjoyed a leisurely visit to his summer home at his hometown of Fairhaven. He spent time driving through town in his automobile and visiting with old friends. Returning to New York, he had worked just the day before in his office at the Standard Oil building at 26 Broadway in Manhattan.\par
\par
That same morning, Twain was already aboard a New Haven Railroad passenger train en route from Connecticut to visit his buddy and the family. Arriving at Grand Central Station, he was met by his daughter with the terrible news. Stricken with grief, he uncustomarily avoided news reporters who had gathered, saying only "This is terrible...I cannot talk about it." Two days later, he served as an honorary pallbearer at the Rogers funeral in New York City. However, he declined to join the funeral party on the long and woeful train ride for the interment at Fairhaven. He said "I cannot bear to travel with my friend and not converse."\par
\par
\b\fs36 Legacy\par
\b0\fs24 Clemens' birthplace is preserved in Florida, Missouri, and the \b Mark Twain Boyhood Home and Museum\b0  in Hannibal, Missouri, is one of the most popular museums because it provided the setting for much of the author's work. The home of a childhood friend is preserved as the "Thatcher House" and is said to be the inspiration for his fictional character Becky Thatcher. Clemens was awarded an honorary doctorate from Oxford, and the robes he wore to that ceremony and on many other occasions afterwards (including one daughter's wedding) are on display in the museum. Visitors to Hannibal can also tour the \b Mark Twain Cave \b0 and ride a riverboat on the Mississippi River. In 1874 Clemens built a family home in Hartford, Connecticut, where he and Livy raised their three daughters. That home is preserved and open to visitors as the \b Mark Twain House\b0 . Clemens lived in many homes in the United States and abroad.\par
\par
Twain's legacy lives on today as his namesakes continue to multiply. Several schools are named after Twain, including one Houston (Twain Elementary School), which has a statue of Twain sitting on a bnch. In 1998, The \b John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts\b0  created the \b Mark Twain Prize for American Humor\b0 , awarded annually. The Mark Twain Award is an award given annually to a book for children in grades four through eight by the Missouri Association of School Librarians. Stetson University in DeLand, Florida sponsors the Mark Twain Young Authors' Workshop each summer in collaboration with the The Mark Twain Boyhood Home in Hannibal, MO. The program is open to young authors in grades 5-8. The \b Mark Twain Boyhood Home & Museum \b0 in Hannibal, Missouri sponsors the \b Mark Twain Creative Teaching Award\b0 . \par
\par
Actor Hal Holbrook created a one man show callled Mark Twain Tonight. In 1967, CBS broadcast a performance of Mark Twain Tonight for which Holbrook won an Emmy Award. Holbrook has been performing \b Mark Twain Tonight\b0  regularly for the past fifty years, include three runs on Broadway, 1966, 1977 and 2005, the first of which won him a Tony Award. Additionally, like countless influential individuals, Mark Twain was awarded the honor of having an asteroid named after him.\par
\par
\b\fs36 Pen names\par
\b0\fs24 Clemens used different pen names before decliding on Mark Twain. He signed humorous and imaginative sketches "Josh" until 1863. Additionally, he used the pen name "Thomas Jefferson Snodgrass" for a series of humorous letters. He maintained that his primary pen name, "Mark Twain", came from his years working on Mississippi riverboats, where two fathoms (12 ft, approximately 3.7 m) or "safe water" was measured on the sounding line. The riverboatman's cry was "mark twain" or, more fully, "by the mark twain" ("twain" is an archaic term for two). "By the mark twain" meant "according to the mark [on the line], [the depth is] two fathoms"\par
\par
Clemens claimed that his famous pen name was not entirely his invention. In Chapter 50 of Life on the Mississippi he wrote: \par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\li720\i Captain Isaiah Sellers was not of literary turn or capacity, but he used to jot down brief paragraphs of plain practical information about the river, and sign them "MARK TWAIN," and give them to the New Orleans Picayune. They related to the stage and condition of the river, and were accurate and valuable; ... At the time that the telegraph brought the news of his death, I was on the Pacific coast. I was a fresh new journalist, and needed a nom de guerre; so I confiscated the ancient mariner's discarded one, and have done my best to make it remain what it was in his hands\emdash a sign and symbol and warrant that whatever is found in its company may be gambled on as being the petrified truth; how I have succeeded, it would not be modest in me to say.\i0\par
\par
\pard\nowidctlpar\~\par
\par
\par
}
 