## TileExplorer
#### [Download as zip](https://grapecity.github.io/DownGit/#/home?url=https://github.com/GrapeCity/ComponentOne-WinForms-Samples/tree/master/Core\Tile\CS\TileExplorer)
____
#### This sample demonstrates how to use the Tile control.
____
Includes next samples:

* Overview.
  This view shows the basic Tile features.
* AppsPanel.
  Simulates Windows 8 "All Apps" screen and allows to choose the color scheme.
  The sample demonstrates new features of C1TileControl, such as the Template.Enabled property that allows, for example, to display sub-group captions among the clickable tiles.
  Also, it shows the new HotBackColor and CheckBackColor properties that offer one more way to highlight the hovered and checked tiles (it updates the tile's background color instead of displaying the special border).
* DataBound.
  Shows an example of binding C1TileControl to a data source.
  A tile element is generated for each row in the associated DataTable (except those skipped in the FilterItem event).
  You can map data columns to the properties of the autogenerated Tile components.
  If some columns contain cryptic foreign key values (such as Product.SupplierID), use the Lookup property of the PropertyMapping object to replace those values with meaningful strings (such as Supplier.Country) from another table or data source.
* FileExplorer.
  The sample allows browsing the files and folders on the local drives.
  There are two C1TileControl in this sample. One is used as the scrollable toolbar and the other shows individual items, such as drives and folders.
  Each type of the item has the special tile template.
  For example, the drive's tile template shows a progress bar using the Template.Paint event (to visualize the available space on the drive).
* MovingSlides.
  The sample demonstrates slides that replace each other using various transitions.
  Slides are somewhat similar to the same feature of Microsoft PowerPoint.
  They show some data for a given amount of time with possible random variation, then switch to another slide using the specified transition.
  Transitions may be accelerated or decelerated. You can also define the topmost elements that appear as the fixed layer above all slides.
  When you maximize the MovingSlides application the transitions may be not very smooth.
  Having too many animated slides that are visible on the same screen may degrade the performance.
  Use this feature with caution. You can rearrange tiles in this demo with the mouse or touch interface.
* TileImages.
  The sample shows how to display images on tiles using various techniques.
  Tiles can display one or several images. An image can be specified in the Tile using its Image, ImageKey, or Symbol properties.
  Also, it can be specified as a part of the template's ImageElement or stored in one of the CommonImage objects that belong to C1TileControl.
  There are a few tricks when working with images.
  For example, you can create a big image that consists of N images in width and M images in height.
  If so, the ImageElement.ImageColumns property must be set to N, and ImageElement.ImageRows property must be set to N.
  Also, the ColumnIndex and RowIndex properties can be used to pick a small image from large matrix.
* TileLayout.
  The sample shows various methods of laying out the template elements.
  Tiles and templates are the most important components of C1TileControl.
  Tile provides the data, template provides the visualization pattern.
  You can switch templates for the same tile. For example, the first template may show the tile image and the second may show the detailed tile text.
  Also, you can apply the same template to multiple tiles.
  Templates may consist of three possible elements: panel, text, and image.
  Panels may contain child elements including nested panels.
  There are a number of layout settings that give you full freedom in laying out the template elements.
  The sample shows a few layouts.
